---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300 Portfolio
description: Just a spaceship that I designed
technologies: N/A
image: /assets/images/spaceship-design.jpg
---


Over the course of this semester, we have spent time in this class analyzing the Beoing 737 Max crisis to gain perspective on the importance of engineering ethics in industry. The Boeing crisis encompasses a breakdown not only in technical decision-making but in engineering ethics and the culture of large corporations. A common theme that is clear throughout the duration of the crisis was that public safety was not prioritized due to differences in stakeholder values from people at numerous levels of involvement with the situation. Design choices such as the implementation of MCAS without giving pilots the proper training or information to deal with potential complications with the software all just to prioritize speed to market and cost competitiveness ended up being a huge risk to the lives of a lot of people. While no single engineering decision caused the disasters, the accumulation of a lot of small buraeucratic rule bendings created a system vulnerable to catastrophic failure.

Stakeholder values were misaligned throughout the process. Airlines didn't want to pay to retrain pilots or invest more into the maintenance of aircraft, which influended higher-ups at Boeing to cut corners wherever possible to ensure that their latest product met those requirements for their customers. The rules they bent looked like they would increase profits, but in reality they were bypassing critical safety tests and ignoring catastrophic simulation failures that indicated that the safety of passengers, pilots, and plane flight crews were in complete jeopardy. This was all happening under the noses of pilots and passengers, the people who would actually be on those planes, and they were the stakeholders with the most on the line: their own lives. Engineers and inspectors at Boeing were pressured to ignore safety concerns and cut corners to meet strict deadlines and impossible design constraints by their own bosses, which is how everything was swept under the rug before the eventual Boeing crashes. This shows how important it is for engineers to follow strict ethical guidelines when they notice that something shady is happening; there were a lot of things that went wrong that led to the Boeing crashes, but the fact of the matter is that the students of this class are engineers, and we might be in a position similar to that of some Boeing engineers some day, so we should be ready to stand up for what is right if that time comes because there is no guarantee that anyone else will be brave enough to do so.

There were also plenty of other things that could have meaningfully reduced the likelihood or severity of the crisis. These include greater system redundancies (from a technical standpoint), clearer pilot training and documentation (transparency would make it significantly more difficult to sweep problems under the rug), stronger internal reporting protections for engineers (to mitigate the culture of fear for losing your job for standing up for the right thing), and a more independent certification process insulated from commercial pressure (the FAA should have never outsourced inspections of Boeing aircraft to Boeing itself). From an ethical standpoint, it is the professional responsibility of engineers to speak out about shady business practies that prioritize anything above safety at all. If Boeing had prioritized safety first and then profits second, they would not have lost the public's trust over the entire crisis. This surely would have been a much more optimal outcome for them, but they could not resist the corporate greed that enticed them to try to get away with more than they should have.

The Boeing crisis should serve as a cautionary tale for all engineers; it's shocking that people would cut so many corners with something that put so many lives on the line, but the story sticks with you as a reminder to never let something like that happen again. Things like this could happen at any company, not just ones where public safety is being risked at such a large scale, but it is still important for engineers to maintain their own ethical codes to ensure that their technical skill is being applied with only the best interests in mind for all stakeholders involved. 
